---
title: JOSE signed Voucher Artifacts for Bootstrapping Protocols
abbrev: JOSE-voucher
docname: draft-richardson-anima-jose-voucher-00

stand_alone: true

ipr: trust200902
area: Internet
wg: anima Working Group
kw: Internet-Draft
cat: std

pi:    # can use array (if all yes) or hash here
  toc: yes
  sortrefs:   # defaults to yes
  symrefs: yes

author:


- ins: M. Richardson
  name: Michael Richardson
  org: Sandelman Software Works
  email: mcr+ietf@sandelman.ca

- ins: T. Werner
  name: Thomas Werner
  org: Siemens
  email: thomas-werner@siemens.com

normative:
  BRSKI: I-D.ietf-anima-bootstrapping-keyinfra
  RFC8366:
  RFC7515:
  RFC8259:
  RFC8812:

informative:
  RFC5280:
  RFC8572:
  RFC5652:
  RFC8949:

--- abstract

This document describes a serialiation of the RFC8366 voucher format to a JSON format is then signed using the JSON Object Signing and Encryption mechanism described in RFC7515.

In addition to explaining how the format is created, MIME types are registered and examples are provided.

--- middle

# Introduction

{{RFC8366}} describes a voucher artifact used in {{BRSKI}} and {{RFC8572}} to transfer ownership of a device to from a manufacturer to an owner.
That document defines the base YANG module, and also the initial serialization to JSON {{RFC8259}}, with a signature provided by {{RFC5652}}.

Other work, {{?I-D.ietf-anima-constrained-voucher}} provides a mapping of the YANG to CBOR {{?RFC8949}} with a signature format of COSE {{RFC8812}}.

This document provides an equivalent mapping of JSON format with the signature format in JOSE format {{RFC7515}}.

This document does not extend the YANG definition of {{RFC8366}} at all, but accepts that other efforts such as {{?I-D.richardson-anima-voucher-delegation}}, {{?I-D.friel-anima-brski-cloud}}, and {{?I-D.ietf-anima-brski-async-enroll}} do.
This document supports signing any of the extended schemas defined in those documents and any new documents that may appear after this one.

# Terminology

{::boilerplate bcp14}

# JSON Web Signatures

{{RFC7515}} defines two serializations: the JWS Compact Serialization and the JWS JSON Serialization.
This document restricts itself to the JWS Compact Serialization (JWT) format.

The {{RFC8366}} JSON structure consists of a nested map, the outer part of which is:

~~~~
{ "ietf-voucher:voucher" : { ..some items }}
~~~~

this is considered the JSON payload as described in {{RFC7515}} section 3.

The JSON Compact Serialization is examplained in section 3.1 or section 7.1, and works out to:

~~~~
      BASE64URL(UTF8(JWS Protected Header)) || '.' ||
      BASE64URL(JWS Payload) || '.' ||
      BASE64URL(JWS Signature)
~~~~

There are a number of attributes.
They are:

## Unprotected Header

There is no unprotected header in the Compact Serialization format.

## Protected Header

The standard "typ" and "alg" values described in {{RFC7515}} are expected in the protected headers.

It is unclear what values, if any, should go into the "typ" header, as in the {{BRSKI}} use cases, there are additional HTTP MIME type headers to indicate content types.

The "alg" should contain the algorithm type such as "ES256".

If PKIX {{RFC5280}} format certificates are used then the {{RFC7515}} section 4.1.6 "x5c"
certificate chain SHOULD be used to contain the certificate and chain.
Vouchers will often need all certificates in the chain, including what would be considered the trust anchor certificate because intermediate devices (such as the Registrar) may need to audit the artifact,
or end systems may need to pin a trust anchor for future operations.

# Privacy Considerations

YYY

# Security Considerations

ZZZ

# IANA Considerations

## Media-Type Registry

This section registers the the 'application/voucher-jwt+json' in the "Media Types" registry.

### application/voucher-jose+json

    Type name:  application
    Subtype name:  voucher-jwt+json
    Required parameters:  none
    Optional parameters:  none
    Encoding considerations:  JWT+JSON vouchers are JOSE objects
                              signed with one signer.
    Security considerations:  See Security Considerations, Section
    Interoperability considerations:  The format is designed to be
      broadly interoperable.
    Published specification:  THIS RFC.
    Applications that use this media type:  ANIMA, 6tisch, and other
      zero-touch imprinting systems
    Additional information:
      Magic number(s):  None
      File extension(s):  .vjj
      Macintosh file type code(s):  none
    Person & email address to contact for further information:  IETF
      ANIMA WG
    Intended usage:  LIMITED
    Restrictions on usage:  NONE
    Author:  ANIMA WG
    Change controller:  IETF
    Provisional registration? (standards tree only):  NO

# Acknowledgements

Hello.

# Changelog


--- back

# Examples

## Example Voucher Request (from Pledge)

The following is an example sent from a Pledge to the Registrar.

INSERT_CODE_FROM_FILE examples/voucher_request_01.b64.folded END

It contains the following three parts:

Header:

INSERT_CODE_FROM_FILE examples/voucher_request_01-header.b64.folded END

Payload:

INSERT_CODE_FROM_FILE examples/voucher_request_01-payload.b64.folded END

Signature:

INSERT_CODE_FROM_FILE examples/voucher_request_01-signature.b64.folded END




